Republic of the Bbhilippines
Department of Education

| MAY 16 2024
DepEd ORDER
No. (07, s. 2024

POLICY GUIDELINES ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REVISED
SCHOOL-BASED MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

To: Undersecretaries
Assistant Secretaries
Bureau and Service Directors
Minister, Basic, Higher, and Technical Education, BARMM
Regional Directors
Schools Division Superintendents
Public and Private Elementary and Secondary School Heads
All Others Concerned

1. The Department of Education (DepEd) issues the enclosed Guidelines on the
Implementation of the Revised School-Based Management (SBM) System which
aims to strengthen the policy on decentralizing decision-making authority to school
administration on matters affecting school operations and to establish a mechanism
on continuous improvement and provision of technical assistance at the school level.

2. The SBM framework, process, and self-assessment checklist constituting the
implementation of this policy shall guide all public elementary and secondary
schools, schools division offices (SDOs), regional offices (ROs), and the Central Office
(CO) in nurturing a culture of continuous improvement of school practices and
learning outcomes.

3. DepEd Order (DO) No. 83, s. 2012 titled Implementing Guidelines on the
Revised School-Based Management (SBM) Framework, Assessment Process and Tool
(APAT), and all other issuances inconsistent with this Order, and their provisions are
repealed, rescinded, or amended accordingly.

4. This DO shall take effect 15 days after its approval, posting on the website,
and publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
Certified copies of the DO shall be registered with the Office of the National
Administrative Register (ONAR) at the University of the Philippines Law Center (UP
LC), UP Diliman, Quezon City.

S. For inquiries or concerns, ;, please contact the Bureau of Human Resource
and Organizational. Development-School Effectiveness Division (BHROD-SED),
Mabini Building, DepEd Central Office, DepEd Complex, Meralco Avenue, Pasig City
through the email at bhrod.sed@deped.gov.ph or at telephone number (02) 8633-
5397.

DepEd Complex, Meralco Avenue, Pasig City 1600 Be  3633-7208/ 8633-7228 /8632-1361 “:" 8636-4876/8637-6209 © www. deped.gov-ph


6. Immediate dissemination of and strict compliance with this Order is directed.

Digitally signed

_ by Duterte Sara

fre oe ofp BIE Atoms deel) Zimmenman
TH MLANGA “=" Date: 2024.05.15
SARA Z. DUTERTE oo 5:26:58 +08'00"

Vice President of the Republic of the Philippines
Secretary of the Department of Education

Encl.:
As stated

Reference:
DepEd Order (No. 83, s. 2012)

To be indicated in the Perpetual Index
under the following subjects:

ASSESSMENT
FUNDS
POLICY
PROGRAMS
PROJECTS

JDM,C, APA MPC, DO Policy Guidelines on the Implementation of the Revised SBM System
0624 ~ April 18, 2024


(Enclosure to DepEd Order No.0Q7 , s. 2024)

POLICY GUIDELINES ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REVISED
SCHOOL-BASED MANAGEMENT (SBM) SYSTEM

I. RATIONALE

The implementation of the Republic Act (RA) 9155, otherwise known as the Governance
of Basic Education Act of 2001, provides direction for decentralizing the system of
management and governance at the school level and further recognizes the role of local
government units and other stakeholders as partners in education service delivery.! The
said Republic Act allows for an innovative approach to empower school heads and their
personnel to collaborate with the community in ensuring the delivery of quality basic
education and achieving improved learning outcomes. School heads, in consultation
with internal and external stakeholders, are provided the opportunity to address and
decide on issues and concerns directly involving day-to-day school operations.

In 2012, the Department of Education (DepEd) provided the parameters for exercising
decentralized decision-making at the school level through the DepEd Order (DO) No.
083, s. 2012, the Implementing Guidelines on the Revised School-Based Management
(SBM) Framework, Assessment Process, and Tool (APAT). In this policy, SBM, as a reform
thrust, was broadened to better highlight the learners as the center of SBM practice and
to encompass the diverse realities of learning contexts uniquely occurring within specific
geographic, social, cultural, economic, political, and environmental make-up in
societies.

However, in the course of institutionalizing SBM, various implementation gaps emerged.
Across Regions, Schools Divisions, and Schools; these areas for improvement were
common, yet differentiated due to contextualized practices. Practitioners at the school
level contended that its implementation was laden with voluminous and repetitive
documentary requirements resulting in additional tasks assigned to the teaching
personnel. These documentary requirements were used as means of verification to
ascertain the SBM level of practice based on a scoring system. Similarly, the
operationalization of the scoring system became challenging due to the exercise of an
arbitrary approach to determining the outcome indicators that would support the level
of practice declared by schools.

In response to the implementation concerns, a review commenced to further identify
other policy issues. In the review, the need to update the SBM framework became
apparent. Recently, innovative education programs, projects, and activities have been
introduced and taken root in the Philippine education system in response to the current

1 Department Order (DO) No. 083, s. 2012, Implementing Guidelines on the Revised School-Based
Management (SBM) Framework, Assessment Process and Tool (APAT)

1 of 16


global and local trends. People effectiveness frameworks have also been issued to
complement organization effectiveness in achieving organizational success. These
developments justified the pursuance of policy development.

The updating of the policy provides a definitive understanding that SBM is the gateway
- to school effectiveness. The practice of SBM is the preparation phase in which all
schools are given an equitable opportunity to hone their intrinsic motivation to
continuously improve. It is through this appreciation of the linkage between SBM and
organizational success that schools learn how to endeavor for excellence. Furthermore,
the updated guidelines enhance the commitment of education stakeholders to their
responsibilities and accountabilities in realizing improved learning outcomes.

Another key feature describes a broader appreciation of rewards and recognitions.
While it is a fact that extrinsic rewards and recognitions are aspired by organizations,
the Department also recognizes the importance of organizational introspection as a
strong foundation for sustainable school improvement. SBM is designed to nurture the
intrinsic motivations of schools which shall eventually open opportunities for extrinsic
rewards.

A revitalized approach to the provision of technical assistance is also advocated in
this policy. By clarifying the purpose of this mechanism, the Department guarantees an
equitable provision of support that is evidence-based, appropriate, and relevant.

With the DepEd Vision, Mission, and Core Values (VMVs) playing an important role in
providing a common goal, all schools shall have access to an attainable long-term
objective that shall guide them to reach organizational success, regardless of their
varying conditions.

Il. SCOPE OF THE POLICY

All public schools in the Philippines shall adopt and implement the revised guidelines
on School-Based Management. This policy covers the scope of the roles and
responsibilities of the Schools Division Offices, Regional Offices, and the Central Office
in ensuring the institutionalization of SBM in all public schools.

All private schools are strongly encouraged to adopt and implement this policy.
Ill. DEFINITION OF TERMS
For this policy, the following terms are defined as follows:
1. Community Learning Center (CLC) - a physical space to house learning

resources and facilities of a learning program for out-of-school children in
special cases and adults. It is a venue for face-to-face learning activities and

2 of 16


other learning opportunities for community development and improvement of
people’s quality of life?

2. Community of schools (a.k.a. cluster of schools) - a group of schools that are
geographically contiguous and brought together to improve learning outcomes?

3. Continuous improvement (process) - a methodology to continually assess,
analyze, and act on the performance improvement of key processes and service
delivery, focusing on both stakeholder needs and the desired performance*

4, Learner (pupil or student) - any individual, regardless of age, sex, gender,
disability, ethnicity, culture, and religion, seeking basic literacy skills and
_ functional life skills or support services, and enrolled in basic education to_
enhance his/her knowledge, skills, and values for the improvement of the quality

of his/her life and develop his/her potentials5

i, Adults - Filipinos ages 18 years old and above who were not able to begin or
continue basic elementary or secondary education in formal schoolé

ii. Out-of-School Children in Special Cases - Children of official school age who
are not enrolled in elementary or secondary school due to special cases such
as economic, geographic, political, cultural, or social barriers, including
learners with disabilities or conditions, indigenous peoples, children in conflict
with the law, learners in emergency situations, and other marginalized sectors?

5. School — an educational institution, including school-based CLCs under the
control and supervision of the Department of Education, undertaking
educational operations with a specific age group of pupils or students pursuing
defined studies and defined levels, receiving instructions from teachers, usually
located in a building or group of buildings in a particular physical or cyber site’

A school’s basic internal composition consists of its teaching, teaching-related,
non-teaching personnel, and other internal stakeholders.

6. School-Based Management (SBM) - the decentralization of decision-making
authority from central, regional, and division levels to.the individual schools,

2 Republic Act (RA) No. 9155: Governance of Basic Education Act of 2001 and Republic Act (RA} No. 11510:
Alternative Learning System Act

3 Republic Act (RA) No. 9155: Governance of Basic Education Act of 2001

4 Department Order (DO) No. 044, s. 2015, Guidelines on the Enhanced School Improvement Planning
(SIP) Process and the School Report Card (SRC)

5 Republic Act (RA) No. 9155: Governance of Basic Education Act of 2001; Department Order (DO) No. 044,
s.2021, Policy Guidelines on the Provision of Educational Programs and Services for Learners with
Disabilities in the K to 12 Basic Education Program; and Department Order (DO) No. 021, s. 2019, Policy
Guidelines on the K to 12 Basic Education Program

5 Republic Act (RA) No. 11510: Alternative Learning System Act

? Republic Act (RA) No. 11510: Alternative Learning System Act

® Department Order (DO) No. 052, s. 2016, Data Collection of Basic Education Statistics in the Learner

Information System and Enhanced Basic Education Information System for Beginning of School Year
2016-2017

3 of 16


8.

10.

with the intent of bringing together school heads, teachers, learners, as well as
parents, the local government units, and the community at large to improve
learning outcomes through effective schools?

School community - the immediate basic political unit where the school is
physically situated, with reference to its catchment area, 1e., the area within a
two-kilometer (2-km) radius, and one-kilometer (1-km) radius from any existing
public school in rural and urban areas, respectively!®

A school community may also collectively refer to the various internal and
external stakeholders who are invested in the welfare and continuous
improvement not only of the school system, but also of the immediate barangay,
municipality, or city where the school belongs.

School head - the person responsible and accountable for the administrative

. Management and instructional supervision of the school or cluster of schools.

In the absence of a principal, this concept shall refer to the Teacher-in-Charge,
Officer-in-Charge, Master Teacher, or other persons officially designated as
school head by the Schools Division Superintendent!!

School personnel - a teaching, teaching-related, or non-teaching staff who is
assuming roles and responsibilities in the day-to-day operations of the school

Stakeholder - any person, school, recognized Parent-Teacher Association (PTA),
Local Government Unit (LGU), and other organizations that has/have
professional or civic interests or concerns for the interest of the schools and their
students!2

i. Internal stakeholder - anyone who is directly and immediately involved in
or affected by the daily operations of the school

Internal stakeholders include the learners and school personnel.

iii External stakeholder - anyone who is not directly involved in or affected by
the daily educational operations of the school but expresses his/her stakes
in the larger educational system and community dynamics through the
extension of support to school programs, advocacies, and other undertakings.

External stakeholders may include parents and guardians, community
members, local government units, civil society organizations, other national
government agencies and government-owned and controlled corporations,

° Department Order (DO) No. 044, s. 2015, Guidelines on the Enhanced School Improvement Planning
(SIP) Process and the School Report Card (SRC)

10 Department Order (DO} No. 040, s. 2014, Establishment, Merging, Conversion, and Naming/Renaming
of Public Schools, and Separation of Public School Annexes in Basic Education

4 Republic Act (RA) No. 9155: Governance of Basic Education Act of 2001 and Department Order (DO)

No. 045, s. 2015, Guidelines on School-Based Management (SBM) Grants for Fiscal Year (FY) 2014

2 Department Order (DO) No. 052, s. 2016, Data Collection of Basic Education Statistics in the Learner
Information System and Enhanced Basic Education Information System for Beginning of School Year
2016-2017

4 of 16


international organizations, private companies, business enterprises,
corporate foundations, cooperatives, and other concerned private
individuals.!$

IV. POLICY STATEMENT

This Policy on School-Based Management is in line with the provisions of the Republic
Act (RA) 9155. As such, schools, their personnel, and community stakeholders are
accorded the opportunity to collectively plan and decide on their delivery of quality basic
education, achievement of learning outcomes, and transformation into effective
organizations.

Moreover, this policy serves as an enabling mechanism to address the challenges in
basic education. The effective and efficient implementation of the SBM shall contribute
‘to realizing holistically developed Filipino learners with 21st-century skills who are
Maka-Diyos, Makatao, Makakalikasan, and Makabansa, aligned with the sector
outcome that is the Basic Education Filipino learners have the physical, cognitive, socio-
emotional, and moral preparation for civic participation and engagement in post-
_ secondary opportunities in their local, national, and global communities.'4 Likewise,
the implementation of the SBM shall further contribute in achieving the national goal,
which is ”All Filipinos are able to realize their full potential and contribute meaningfully
to a cohesive nation.”15 :

All schools shall endeavor to cultivate a culture of continuous improvement. Alongside
this, schools are expected to regularly undergo self-assessment using the SBM self-
assessment checklist for purposes of progress monitoring and evaluation.

V. GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES

The continuous improvement process is a fundamental anchor in SBM that ensures
the transformation of all schools into effective organizations. The continuous
improvement process nurtures an ideal school culture that promotes school self-
reflection, self-management, and self-improvement.

Self-reflection pertains to understanding a school’s current situation by describing the
roots of issues, concerns, and areas for improvement and identifying responsive courses
of action. Learning is the result of self-reflection.1¢ It allows the school to have a broader
perspective of its situation which aids in the development of strategies that shall address

43 Rephrased based on External Partnership Service (EPS) documents

4 Department Order (DO) No. 024, s. 2022, Adoption of the Basic Education Development Plan 2030

45 Department Order (DO) No. 024, s. 2022, Adoption of the Basic Education Development Plan 2030

16 Mezirow. J. (1981). A Critical Theory of Adult Learning and Education. Adult Education. 32(1):3-24.
(electronic).

5 of 16


gaps, and consequently, the school shall have a deeper understanding of its own
behavior.1!7

Self-management pertains to planning, organizing, leading, and managing resources
to ensure the attainment of organizational goals.!§ It also means the ability of schools
to continuously learn new ways to support improvement efforts and expand community
networks for sustainable partnerships.

Self-improvement enhances the capacity to address problems, refine processes and
procedures, innovate on the delivery of services, and continuously apply effective and
efficient practices in school operations. Self-improvement is a purposive approach to
initiating educational reforms that aim to enhance learning outcomes as well as
strengthen the school’s capacity for managing change.19

SBM aims to achieve both people and organization effectiveness in realizing
organizational success. SBM seeks to sustain improvements in the multi-faceted areas
of school operations. The school head harnesses professional competencies to meet the
challenges in management and governance.

Thus, the guiding principles applicable to school heads as stipulated in the Philippine
Professional Standards for School Heads,2° (PPSSH) are. consistently aligned in the
practice of school-based management.

A. Principles

- The SBM as an organization effectiveness framework and the PPSSH as a people
effectiveness framework have common and shared principles which are summarized
as follows.?!

Learner-centered and Inclusive. Learner-centered and inclusive education is
needs-based and rights-based, learning-focused, developmental-stage appropriate,
gender and culture-sensitive, environmentally safe, and accessible.

This also means that.a conducive learning environment is maintained to support the
teaching and learning process. The conditions in school are made free of and
protected from discrimination, exploitation, abuse, violence, and bullying which
“may be based on any ground such as age, ethnicity, sex, sexual orientation and
gender identity, language, religion, political or other opinion, and national or social
origin,”22 among others.

17 Gdker, S. D., & Bozkus, K. (2017). Reflective Leadership: Learning to manage and lead human
organizations. Contemporary leadership challenges, 27-45. (electronic).

18 Daft, R. L. (2015). Management. Cengage Learning. (electronic).

19 Hopkins, D. (2001). School Improvement for Real (Ist ed.). Routledge. (electronic).

20 Department Order (DO) No. 024, s. 2020, National Adoption and Implementation of the Philippine
Professional Standards for School Heads

24 Department Order (DO) No. 083, s..2012, Implementing Guidelines on the Revised School-Based
Management (SBM) Framework, Assessment Process and Tool (APAT) and Department Order (DO) No.
024, s. 2020, National Adoption and Implementation of the Philippine Professional Standards for Schoo! |
Heads

22 Department Order (DO) No. 040, s. 2012, DepEd Child Protection Policy

6 of 16


Strategic Planning. A network of leadership and governance guides the education
system to achieve its shared vision, mission, and goals making them responsive and
relevant to the context of diverse environments. By planning strategically,
improvement efforts are made more evidence-based and decisions are well-informed
with the responsible use of school-community data and resources.

Leadership and Governance. Setting directions is crucial in realizing goals for the
benefit of learners. This principle guides internal and external stakeholders in
achieving a shared vision, thus, making schools responsive to the context of diverse
environments. Transparency and accountability also describe the network of
leadership and governance that schools establish. Decisions, action plans, and
results are the responsibility of the school management, together with stakeholders.

Stakeholder Participation. Engaging the community promotes the strengthening of
organizational support. Through this principle, collective ownership of improvement .
efforts is shared between the school and the stakeholders, and collaboration to
address concerns is encouraged. The school community organizes, mobilizes, and
manages resources to foster a high level of commitment toward achieving improved
learning outcomes.

Excellence. This principle focuses on the improvement of people and organizations
to support learners in becoming holistically developed individuals. Excellence also
applies to the sustained efforts to put in place effective school practices and efficient
processes.

Additionally, the pillars outlined in the DepEd’s Basic Education Development Plan?3
also serve as guiding principles with which SBM is also aligned. These pillars are as
follows:

Access. All school-age children, out-of-school youth, and adults accessed relevant
basic learning opportunities.

Equity. Disadvantaged school-age children and youth, and adults benefited form
appropriate equity initiatives.

Quality. Learners complete K-12 basic education, having successfully attained all
learning standards that equip them with the necessary skills and attributes to
pursue their chosen paths.

Resiliency and Well-being. Learners are resilient and know their rights, and have

the life skills to protect themselves and exercise their education related rights, while
being aware of their responsibilities as individuals and as members of society.

23 Department Order (DO) No. 024, s. 2022, Adoption of the Basic Education Development Plan 2030 — |

7 of 16


B. Conceptual Framework

Figure 1. SBM Conceptual Framework

The framework shows the active involvement of school-community stakeholders in
SBM practice. These internal and external stakeholders observe self-reflection, self-
management, and self-improvement to influence the sustainable development of the
various dimensions of school operations. As these school dimensions are improved,
the achievement of higher learning outcomes is realized, and Filipino learners are
developed with the necessary 21st-century skills. Explicit in this SBM framework
and consistent with the education plan of the Department, “Filipino learners are
envisioned to be holistically developed in basic education, acquiring 21st-century skills
that will enable them to manage oneself, build connections, inquire, innovate, stay
nimble, and serve beyond self. They must take pride in Filipino national identity and
nationhood and aspire to flourish and have life skills, economic prosperity, socio-
political stability, unity in diversity; be responsive, competitive; and live in a
sustainable world by upholding the core values: Maka-Diyos, .Makatao,
Makakalikasan, at Makabansa.”24 ,

Alongside the school strategic planning process and active stakeholder engagement
is an established school monitoring and evaluation which is integral to effective and
inclusive school-based management and embedded in all phases of the SBM
practice. This shall encourage self-assessment and, consequently,  self-
improvement which is essential in becoming responsive organizations.

24 Department Order (DO) No. 24, s. 2022, Adoption of the Basic Education Development Plan 2030 am

8 of 16


The following areas in school operations, defined as SBM dimensions, shall be
enhanced to produce ideal Filipino learners and to achieve organizational success:

Curriculum and Teaching. School personnel and stakeholders work
collaboratively to enhance learning standards to continually build a relevant and
inclusive learning community and achieve improved learning outcomes.

Learning Environment. The school and its community work collaboratively to
ensure equitable access to a learner-centered, motivating, healthy, safe, secure,
inclusive, resilient, and enabling learning environment and to achieve improved
learning outcomes.

Leadership. School personnel and stakeholders are empowered and actively
engaged in taking on appropriate leadership roles and responsibilities to
continuously improve the school for improved learning outcomes.

Governance and Accountability. The school and its community come together

to take responsibility for ensuring participation, transparency, and

accountability, as well as the implementation of a plan to continuously improve

the delivery of basic education services, organizational health, and performance
_for improved learning outcomes.

Human Resource and Team Development. School personnel collaborate to
continuously improve individual capabilities and team capacity to create an
environment that shall yield high performance for improved learning outcomes.

Finance and Resource Management and Mobilization. The school judiciously
manages. and mobilizes resources to support programs, projects, and activities
‘that contribute to the improvement of learning outcomes.

C. Degree of Manifestation of SBM Practice
The degrée by which the SBM practice is manifested by. schools provides a basis

for their continuous improvement. Schools are encouraged to use the results of
their self-assessment as input to their strategic and implementation plans.

Degree of Manifestation
; An SBM indicator is consistently observed and
Always manifested . :
achieved at all times
. An SBM indicator is most of the time observed and
Frequently manifested ;
achieved

An SBM indicator is sometimes observed and
achieved

An SBM indicator is neither observed nor achieved

All schools shall endeavor to frequently manifest or always manifest school |

Rarely manifested

Not yet manifested

practices and learning outcomes expressed as SBM indicators in the self-
assessment checklist.

9 of 16


D. SBM Self-Assessment

The purpose of the school’s self-assessment using the SBM Self-Assessment
Checklist (see Annex A) is for continuous improvement. The continuous
improvement reached by a school is the intrinsic reward for implementing school-
based management.

1. Self-Assessment and Technical Assistance (TA) Calendar

Self-assessment is embedded as a process resulting from school management
and operations. Therefore, schools may undergo self-assessment as many
times as deemed necessary. This policy, however, recommends and
encourages schools to observe a calendar (refer to Figure 2) for the conduct of
Self-Assessment and provision of Technical Assistance.

Figure 2. Self-Assessment and Technical Assistance Calendar

Integrate res ts of school self.

patrt plan

Calendar: ‘Vacation months of.
“learners prior to the start of: the new
school year.

*Provision of TA may be given at
any time during the school year.
To ensure that there is only
minimal disruption to operatioris,
TA may alternatively be done
during scheduled school . breaks
or may also be _ strategically
incorporated in the conduct of
school M&E, planning, and
adjustment.

10 of 16


2. Essential Steps in the Conduct of. Self-Assessment by Schools and
Provision of Technical Assistance by the SDOs

STEP 1. The school undergoes self-assessment. This step is ideally done
during the fourth grading period of the current school year.

a. The school refers to the SBM Self-Assessment Checklist (see Annex
A) to guide its process of continuous improvement.

b. The school invites its internal and external stakeholders to
participate in the self-assessment which includes an analysis of
observed school practices and achieved learning outcomes stated as
SBM indicators in the self-assessment checklist.

STEP 2. The school integrates the results ofits self-assessment in its strategic
plan as identified improvement areas and in the (adjusted) implementation
plan asa school program, project, or activity for continuous improvement.
This step is recommended to be done during the vacation months of learners
prior to the start of the new school year. .

STEP 3. The school implements its plan for continuous improvement of
practices and learning outcomes. This step is suggested to be done during
the first to third grading periods of the current school year. During this period,
the school also:

a. Monitors its progress.

b. Undergoes subsequent self-assessments as deemed necessary.

c. Arranges an invitation to its SDO to provide technical assistance. The
school and its SDO ensure that classes and regular.operations are
not disrupted.

c.1. The school establishes its context with the SDO based on the
results of progress monitoring and the status of SBM

implementation.

c.2. The SDO recommends specific courses of action that are
appropriate to the school’s current status and context.

c.3. The school and SDO agree on priority improvement areas in the
various SBM dimensions.

After all the steps have been observed, the school goes back to STEP 1 and
conducts another self-assessment for continuous improvement.

_ 11 of 16


E. Documentary Requirements

Relative to the implementation of SBM, the prior practice of attaching various means
of verification as documentary evidence to attest to the level of practice is no longer
necessary.

On the other hand, the SBM Self-Assessment Checklist shall be accomplished as a
record of the status of SBM implementation and continuous improvement of schools.
It shall also serve as the basis for the provision of technical assistance from the
Schools Division Offices. Agreements between the school and its SDO shall be
documented in the Remarks column of the checklist.

F. Roles and Responsibilities of the Different Governance Levels

Recognizing that continuous improvement through the implementation of SBM is a
shared goal of the Schools and community, SDOs, ROs, and the Central Office, the
following provisions enumerate the roles and | responsibilities across. governance
levels.

1. The School. Together with its internal and external stakeholders, the school
strengthens its intrinsic motivation to continuously improve practices, processes,
and learning outcomes through the. implementation of school-based
management.

The school head shall assume the role of the School SBM Coordinator or the
focal person. Consistent with the condition in the PPSSH, “School heads have the
authority, responsibility,..and accountability for taking care of people in schools
(people effectiveness) while maximizing organizational performance and health
(school effectiveness) by setting the direction of schools, managing their systems
and processes, promoting quality teaching and learning, nurturing themselves and
others and engaging stakeholders in initiatives towards the improvement of school
communities. "25

The function of the school head as the SBM focal person shall not be delegated
nor reassigned, especially to any teaching personnel.

2. Schools Division Office. The SDO is responsible for providing technical
assistance and extending guidance to schools in their process of self-
improvement. It is also responsible for ensuring that the results of self-
assessment consistently capture the realities of schools. More importantly, the
SDO shall capacitate its schools as they target improvements in the different SBM
dimensions. . .

25 Department Order (DO) No. 024, s. 2020, National Adoption and Implementation of the Philippine |
Professional Standards for School Heads

12 of 16


The SDOs create and mobilize a Division Field Technical Assistance Team
(DFTAT) to allow for a more comprehensive and holistic approach to guide and
assist schools. The Team is composed of focal persons coming from the different
units within the two functional divisions of the SDO. The Team is.led by the
School Governance and Operations Division (SGOD) and its membership is
based on the specializations necessary in providing targeted support to improve
the SBM dimensions. It is at the discretion of the Office of the Schools Division
Superintendent (OSDS) to approve the final composition and size of its DFTAT,
but at the minimum, the Division SBM Coordinator, who is a Senior
Education Program Specialist from the SGOD-School Management
Monitoring & Evaluation (SMME) unit, shall be a member of the said Team.

3. Regional Office. The RO is responsible for ensuring that its SDOs are
capacitated in providing technical assistance to schools. The RO assesses and
evaluates the appropriateness of the technical assistance which SDOs provide.

The ROs create and mobilize a Regional Field Technical Assistance Team (RFTAT)
to allow for a more comprehensive and holistic approach to guide, assist, and
capacitate SDOs. The Team is composed of focal persons coming from the
different functional divisions of the RO. The Team is led by the Field Technical
Assistance Division (FTAD) and its membership is based on the specializations
necessary in providing various support to continuously improve the SBM
dimensions. It is at the discretion of the Office of the Regional Director (ORD) to
approve the final composition and size of its RFTAT, but at the minimum, the
Regional SBM Coordinator, who is an Education Program Supervisor from
the FTAD, shall be a member of the said Team.

4. Central Office. The CO is responsible for directly capacitating and providing
technical assistance to its immediate counterparts in the Regional Offices.
Whenever necessary, it shall also accord the same support to the SDOs and
schools, provided that proper arrangements and coordination have been
established with respective Regional Offices.

The Central Office, through the Bureau of Human Resource and >
Organizational Development - School Effectiveness Division (BHROD-SED),
shall lead in the promotion and institutionalization of SBM and its support
processes and mechanisms across governance levels. The BHROD-SED shall also
ensure that proper cascading strategies are employed, communication lines are
maintained, duplication of efforts is avoided, and efficiency in the performance of
duties is advocated.

For the purpose of policy development, the BHROD-SED, in collaboration with
various DepEd offices and units, shall develop a mechanism for rewards and
recognition for schools.

G. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)

Consistent with the DepEd Order (DO) No. 029, s. 2022, the Adoption of the Basic
Education Monitoring and Evaluation Framework, SBM as an enabling mechanism

13 of 16


shall empower education leaders and managers to practice participative and
inclusive management processes. *

At the school level, the school head leads the monitoring and evaluation of the
continuous improvement of the various SBM dimensions through the process of
self-assessment. The results of the self-assessment shall be incorporated into the
school’s strategic and implementation plans.

At the SDO level, the SGOD-SMME and the DFTAT shall conduct monitoring in
terms of compliance with the SBM implementing guidelines. The SDO. shall
further conduct a process evaluation to determine, analyze, and address common
challenges of schools in their observance and achievement of school practices
and learning outcomes expressed as SBM indicators.

The M&E results shall be utilized by the SDOs to continuously improve their
provision of technical assistance to schools.

At the RO level, the FTAD and the RFTAT shall conduct monitoring in terms of
compliance with identified roles and responsibilities of the SDOs. The ROs shall
further conduct a process evaluation to determine, analyze, and address the
common challenges of their SDOs in providing appropriate guidance and
assistance.

The M&E results shall inform ROs on how to further enhance their provision of
appropriate guidance and assistance to their SDOs.

Moreover, the BHROD-SED shall monitor the compliance with identified roles
and responsibilities of their direct counterparts in the Regional Offices. In
coordination with SDO-SGOD and RO-FTAD, the BHROD-SED shall conduct
periodic program monitoring to determine bottlenecks and gather feedback
regarding the areas for improvement of policy implementation.

With respect to the policy development process, a periodic review once every after
three (3) fiscal years of the DepEd Order shall also be commenced to continuously
enhance the guidelines.

. Repealing Clause

DepEd Order (DO) No. 083, s. 2012 entitled “Implementing Guidelines on the
Revised School-Based Management (SBM) Framework, Assessment Process, and
Tool (APAT),” and all other issuances inconsistent with this Order and their
provisions are repealed, rescinded, or amended accordingly. |

14 of 16


I. Effectivity and Transitory Provisions

This Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official
Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation. This shall be registered with the
Office of the National Administrative Registrar (ONAR) at the University of the
Philippines (UP) Law Center, UP Diliman, Quezon City.

All Public Schools, SDOs, and ROs shall be given a three-year transitory period
during which they shall familiarize themselves with the revised SBM
implementation guidelines. In addition to understanding the principles guiding
the SBM framework and getting accustomed to the implementation
arrangements, the following shall be observed:

1. Schools shall develop a plan ensuring that their internal and external

stakeholders also become well-informed about the revised guidelines. In
the first year of implementation, they are highly encouraged to subject —
themselves to the SBM self-assessment process using the SBM self-
assessment checklist (See Annex A).

In the succeeding years, schools shall continue observing the process of
continuous improvement and determine the degree of manifestation of the
school practices and learning outcomes referred to as SBM indicators.

. SDOs shall institute a TA plan for schools. The design of the plan shall be

aligned with the self-assessment checklist. They shall also plan: for the

-strategic conduct of technical assistance to their schools relative to the

SBM self-assessment and technical assistance calendar.

. ROs shall revisit their strategies for providing TA to their SDOs. They shall

also come up with a TA plan for their SDOs and develop a regional
implementation plan which is aligned with the national implementation
plan. The conduct of TA shall strengthen the SDO’s capacity and
competency to provide appropriate assistance and support.

. The DepEd Central Office, through the BHROD-SED, shall conduct

national orientations and capacity-building activities and shall inform field
implementers of the national implementation plan for the
institutionalization of the SBM.

J. References

BONE

a

Basic Education Report 2023

Compendium of DepEd Office Functions and Job Descriptions

Daft, R. L. (2015). Management. Cengage Learning. (electronic).

Department Order (DO) No. 024, s. 2022, Adoption of the Basic Education
Development Plan 2030

Department Order (DO) No. 029, s. 2022, Adoption of the Basic Education|
Monitoring and Evaluation Framework

15 of 16


6. Department Order (DO) No. 052, s. 2016, Data Collection of Basic Education
Statistics in. the Learner Information System and Enhanced Basic Education
Information System for Beginning of School Year 2016-2017

7. Department Order (DO) No. 040, s. 2012, DepEd Child Protection Policy

8. Department Order (DO) No. 040, s. 20 14, Establishment, Merging, Conversion,
and Naming/Renaming of Public Schools, and Separation of Public School
Annexes in Basic Education

9. Department Order (DO) No. 045, s. 2015, Guidelines on School- Based
Management (SBM) Grants for Fiscal Year (FY) 2014

10.Department Order (DO) No. 044, s. 2015, Guidelines on the Enhanced School
Improvement Planning (SIP} Process and the School Report Card (SRC)

11.Department Order (DO) No. 002, s. 2015, Guidelines on the Establishment and -
Implementation of the Results-Based Performance Management System
(RPMS) in the Department of Education

12.Department Order (DO) No. 083, s. 2012, Implementing Guidelines on the
Revised School-Based Management (SBM) Framework, Assessment Process
and Tool (APAT)

13.Department Order (DQ) No. 009, s. 2021, Institutionalization of a Quality
Management System in the Department of Education

14.Department Order (DO) No. 024, s. 2020, National Adoption and
Implementation of the Philippine Professional Standards for School Heads

15.Department Order (DO} No. 042, s. 2017, National Adoption and
Implementation of the Philippine Professional Standards for Teachers

16.Department Order (DO) No. 052, s. 2015, New Organizational Structures of the
Central, Regional, and Schools Division Offices of the Department of Education

17. Department Order (DO) No. 036, s. 2013, Our Department Vision, Mission,
and Core Values (DepEd VMV)

18.Department Order (DO) No. 021, s. 2019, Policy: Guidelines on the K to 12
Basic Education Program

19.Department Order (DO) No. 044, s. 2021, Policy Guidelines on the Provision of
Educational Programs and Services for Learners with Disabilities in the K to
12 Basic Education Program

20.Géker, S. D., & Bozkus, K. (2017). Reflective Leadership: Learning to manage
and lead human organizations. Contemporary leadership challenges, 27-45.
(electronic).

21.Hopkins, D. (2001). School Improvement for Real (lst ed.). Routledge.
(electronic).

22.Mezirow J. (1981). A Critical Theory of Adult Learning and Education. Adult
Education. 32(1):3-24. (electronic).

23.Republic Act (RA) 11510, Alternative Learning System Act

24.Republic Act (RA) 9155, Governance of Basic Education Act of 2001 wel

16 of 16


%

Annex A: School-Based Management (SBM) Self-Assessment Checklist

The SBM Self-Assessment Checklist provides a comprehensive understanding of the status of
continuous improvement in the various areas of school operation. The school assesses the six (6)
SBM Dimensions and determines the degree of manifestation for each SBM Indicator. These
indicators are listed as observable school practices and attainable learning outcomes. The extent
by which the indicators are manifested is described as follows: not yet manifested, rarely manifested,
frequently manifested, and always manifested.

Curriculum and Teaching
School personnel and stakeholders work collaboratively to enhance learning standards to continually
build a relevant and inclusive learning community and achieve improved learning outcomes.

Degree of Manifestation
SBM Indicator (Please tick the box that best describes your ae Remarks
Not yet Rarely Preament | ADT. |
manifested | manifested | manifested aa

1. Grade 3 learners achieve the
proficiency level for each cluster of

early language, literacy, and
numeracy skills

2. Grade 6,10, and 12 learners achieve
the proficiency level in all 21st
century skills and core learning
areas in the National Achievement
Test (NAT)

3. School-based ALS learners attain
certification as elementary and
junior high school completers

4. Teachers prepare contextualized
learning materials responsive to the
needs of learners

5. Teachers conduct remediation
activities to address learning gaps in
reading and comprehension, science
and technology, and mathematics

6. Teachers integrate topics promoting
peace and DepEd core values

7. The school conducts test item
analysis to inform its teaching and
learning process

8. ‘The school engages local industries |
to strengthen its TLE-TVL course
offerings



4

Annex A: School-Based Management (SBM) Self-Assessment Checklist

Learning Environment

The school and its community work collaboratively to ensure equitable access to a learner-centered,
motivating, healthy, safe, secure, inclusive, resilient, and enabling learning environment and to
achieve improved learning outcomes.

Degree of Manifestation.
SBM Indicator (Please tick the box that best. describes your school}

Not yet Rarely Frequently Always
manifested | manifested | manifested | manifested
9. The school has zero bullying
incidence
. The school has zero child abuse
incidence

11. The school has reduced its drop-
out incidence

Remarks

12. The school conducts culture-
sensitive activities

. The school has a functional
school-based ALS program

. The school has a functional
child-protection committee

C]
13. The school provides access to im
learning experiences for the
disadvantaged, OSYs, and adult
learners

. The school has a functional Oo
DRRM pian

. The school has a functional
support mechanism for mental
wellness

. The school has special oO
education- and PWD-friendly
facilities



fy

Annex A: School-Based Management (SBM) Self-Assessment Checklist

Leadership

School personnel and stakeholders are empowered and actively engaged in taking on appropriate
leadership roles and responsibilities to continuously improve the school for improved learning
outcomes.

Degree of Manifestation
SBM Indicator (Please tick the box that best describes your schcol)}

Not yet Rarely Frequently
manifested | manifested | manifested | manifested

. The school develops a strategic
plan

. The school has a functional
school-community planning
team

. The school has a functional
Supreme Student Government/
Supreme Pupil Government

. The school innovates in its
provision of frontline services to
stakeholders

Governance and Accountability

The school and its community come together to take responsibility for ensuring participation,
transparency, and accountability, as well as the implementation of a plan to continuously improve
the delivery of basic education services, organizational health, and performance for improved learning
outcomes.

Degree of Manifestation

SBM Indicator (Please tick the box that best describes your school} Remarks
Not yet Rarely Frequently Always
manifested | manifested | manifested | manifested
23. The school’s strategic plan is oO ia oO 0

operationalized through an
implementation plan

24. The school has a functional im im O i
School Governance Council
(SGC)

25. The school has a functional Cc — Cl C] oo Tl
Parent-Teacher Association
(PTA)

26. The school collaborates with Ci Cl Cl
stakeholders and other schools
in strengthening partnerships



8

Annex A: School-Based Management (SBM) Self-Assessment Checklist

27.The school monitorsand
evaluates its programs, projects,
and activities

28. The school maintains an
average rating of satisfactory
from its internal and external
stakeholders

Human Resource and Team Development
School personnel collaborate to continuously improve individual capabilities and team capacity to
create an environment that shall yield high performance for improved learning outcomes.

Degree of Manifestation
(Please tick the box that best describes your school)

Not yet Rarely
manifested | manifested | manifested | manifested

SBM Indicator Remarks

29. School personnel achieve an
average rating of very
Satisfactory in the individual
performance commitment and
review

. The school achieves an average
rating of very satisfactory in the
office performance commitment |
and review

31. The school conducts needs-
based Learning Action Cells and
Learning & Development
activities

32. The school facilitates the
promotion and continuous
professional development of its
personnel

. The school recognizes and
rewards milestone achievements
of its personnel

. The school facilitates receipt of
correct salaries, allowances, and
other additional compensation
in a timely manner

35. Teacher workload is distributed
fairly and equitably



x w

Annex A: School-Based Management (SBM) Self-Assessment Checklist

Tiree ond Resource Management and SERN
The school judiciously manages and mobilizes resources to support programs, projects, and activities
that contribute to the improvement of learning outcomes.

Degree of Manifestation
SBM Indicator (Please tick the box that best describes your school) Remarks
Not yet Frequently
manifested | manifested | manifested | manifested

. The school inspects its
infrastructure and facilities

. The school initiates
improvement of its
infrastructure and facilities

. The school has a functional oO

library

. The school has functional Cl
water, electric, and internet
facilities

. The school has a functional im
computer laboratory/classroom

41. The school achieves a 75-100% oO Cl Cc MO
utilization rate of its
Maintenance and Other
Operating Expenses (MOOE)

42. The school liquidates 100% of Ol oO oO |
its utilized MOOE

